Submitted on Sunday, 30 May, 2021 - 08:54 Submitted by anonymous user: 94.2.227.55 Submitted values are:

  ==SECTION A: PRELIMINARY INFORMATION==
      ==1. Personal details==
          ==1a. Principal Investigator==
            Name: Steven Lilley
            Institution: ISIS neutron and muon source, STFC
            Email: steven.lilley@stfc.ac.uk
            Phone number: 07746663234
            Will the PI be undertaking experimental work? Yes
            
        
          ==1b. Team Members==
              ==First team member (in addition to PI) - if any==
                Name: Lina Quintieri
                Position (e.g. student, postdoctoral research
    associate,
            staff,
                other): staff
                Institution: ISIS neutron and muon source, STFC
                
            
              ==Second team member (in addition to PI) - if any==
                Name: Jack Tweddle
                Position (e.g. student, postdoctoral research
    associate,
            staff,
                other): Student
                Institution: University of Bath / ISIS neutron and
    muon
            source,
                STFC
                
            
              ==Third team member (in addition to PI) - if any==
              Name:  
              Institution:  
            
            
            
        
        
    
    2. Please list other funding sources your research group have
    obtained for the project area: The ISIS neutronics group has an
    active experimental nuclear data program focusing on neutron
    cross sections and thermal scattering law development for
    moderators.  Members of the group have previously performed cross
    section measurements at the ASP facility, Aldermaston, at ISIS
    using the Vesuvio instrument and at the LENS facility in Indiana.
    The group has extensive experience of performing benchmarking and
    validation work including involvement in NEA WPEC sub groups and
    IAEA CRPs. This would be a slightly new area in as much as being
    proton induced reactions but the methodology and techniques
    required are very similar.   The group is mostly funded through
    the ISIS core budget. A separate UK Nuclear Data Network proposal
    may be submitted in the current call (deadline 2nd July 2021) to
    support the purchase of X-ray detectors/electronics to improve
    efficiency in the 10-100 keV region, which may be used in the
    future for subsequent nuclear data work at the high flux facility
    and cyclotron. Such an improvement would lead to further cross
    sections being measurable.
    3. Evidence that the proposed research for which you are applying
    for NNUF funding has been discussed and validated by the NNUF
    facility partner:
    https://nnuf.ac.uk/system/files/nnuf/webform/emails.docx
      ==Please note== 
    
      ==4. Estimate of expenses (travel; subsistence; sample
    transport costs; costs associated with equipment hire off-site
    e.g. transport of kit, insurance etc.)==
        Please upload estimate/quote documentation here:
       
    https://nnuf.ac.uk/system/files/nnuf/webform/expenses_doc.docx
        Feel free to add any further information re expenses in this
    free
        text field if you wish.:
        Expenses are expected to be considerably less than the
    maximum if
        COVID-19 restriction are still in place.
        Samples will be purchased by STFC ISIS facility.
        
    
    

  ==SECTION B: EXPERIMENT INFORMATION==
    1. Experiment title: Proton cross section measurements on
    Tantalum and Tungsten
    2. Experimental details (500 words maximum):
    High quality validated nuclear data is crucial for many
    applications, it underpins our ability to design nuclear
    facilities be that fission, fusion or accelerator based systems. 
    Historically nuclear data has focused on reactions of interest to
    the fission industry but there is increasing use of accelerators
    both for science and medical purposes.  In this work we propose
    to perform proton cross section measurements on Ta and W in the
    range of 10-36 MeV at the MC40 cyclotron at Birmingham.
    This energy range is interesting because it spans the traditional
    change from evaluated nuclear data libraries, e.g. ENDFB up to 20
    MeV, to physics models although some more recent libraries such
    as TENDL stretch to 200 MeV.   Ta and W are of interest as they
    are used in fusion reactors and as targets in spallation neutron
    facilities. In particular there are many compact neutron sources
    under development including laser driven sources, which typically
    use proton energies in the range 14 MeV-100 MeV, including the
    High Brilliance Source in Germany.  Some of the Ta and W reaction
    products also have potential uses as medical isotopes, e.g. W178
    for use in SPECT.
    An examination of Exfor and the literature shows several
    measurable reactions although many reactions do not have data
    points covering the full energy range possible at MC40 or have
    discrepant data between experimental data sets or with
    evaluations.   Several key target reactions have been identified
    as possible to measure with discrepancies are:
    •	181Ta(p,n)181W
    •	181Ta(p,3n)179W
    •	181Ta(p,4n)178W
    •	186W(p,n)186Re
    •	182W(p,2n)181Re
    These reactions have been judged measurable based on half-life,
    decay emissions, magnitude of the expected cross section and
    previous measurements using a similar technique. 
    The experiments use a stack of high purity foils of the target
    material, which will be irradiated by the MC40 proton beam at
    100nA for approximately 1 hour. Then the decay radiation from the
    activation products will be measured using HPGe or X-ray
    detectors as appropriate. These measurements may be repeated at
    several decay times to reduce statistical and systematic errors
    for longer lived products as the short lived radionuclides decay.
     Whilst the experimental procedure is relatively straight-forward
    the challenge is to make high quality measurements by minimising
    all the uncertainties and careful calculation/measurement of all
    the correction factors such as coincidence summing,
    self-shielding, accurate knowledge of the incoming proton flux
    etc. The MC40 cyclotron is a good choice for these experiments as
    it has very good energy resolution (via a bespoke
    silicon-detector-based beam-energy measurement system), quick
    access to the sample and has recently performed similar
    experiments on europium. It also has a well defined procedure for
    determining the proton flux hence helping to minimise this
    particular uncertainty.    
    It is expected that students from both ISIS and the University of
    Birmingham would be involved in the project, helping to train
    them in nuclear data methods.  The project will help to develop
    the breadth of the UK nuclear data capability, which has recently
    seen reinvestment through AFCP at NNL, UKNDN and UKAEA fusion
    research.
    
    3. Which facility/facilities are you applying to access? High
    Flux Accelerator-Driven Neutron Facility (existing cyclotron)
    4. What equipment will you be using at the facility/facilities
    you have selected in the previous question? MC40 cyclotron and
    associated detectors (HPGe & Si detectors)
    5. Data you expect to obtain (200 words maximum):
    In terms of raw data we expect to obtain decay photon spectra
    from HPGe or Si detectors at multiple decay times and for
    multiple sample foils representing different proton energies. We
    would also record associated MC40 parameters e.g. proton energy,
    current, flux data.  We would also record calibration data for
    the detectors and efficiency parameters.
    This will be used to derive reaction cross sections. 
    The expectation is that, if the experiments are successful &
    following careful analysis of the uncertainties, the results
    would be published in a relevant journal and that an entry would
    be prepared for inclusion in Exfor.
    
    6. Specimen description (200 words maximum): High purity foils
    (99.99%) of Ta and W are available in different thicknesses as
    standard products from suppliers such as Advent or Goodfellow. 
    7. Specimen preparation: Minimal sample preparation is needed
    beyond cutting the foils to appropriate size for the beam.
    8. Instrument time:
    3 days beam time split into 3 session separated by 2-4 weeks. 
    Following each irradiation experiment there will also be several
    (3) days of decay spectra measurement for the different foils.
    From the cyclotron team’s experience with such measurements, to
    optimise target foil handling and counting, along with attempting
    a number of initial beam-energies, three days of beam time will
    be required.
    
    9. Special requirements: No additional special requirements
    10. Requested timeline: Access during university summer break is
    preferred as this allows access to more detectors some of which
    are used in teaching laboratories during term time.
    11. Please state whether you are applying for access to take
    place at a future date (for example to enable time for sample
    preparation): No
    12. Are samples radioactive? No
    

13. Does your application constitute a resubmission (i.e. are you resubmitting an application which was previously rejected)? No 14. Have you/your team had previous access granted to the same facility/facilities under earlier rounds of the NNUF access scheme? No SECTION C: PROGRAMME RELEVANCE: This project directly fits within the core priorities of the industrial strategy via clean growth and ageing society due to supporting fusion reactor materials, accelerator technology & potential use of radiopharmaceuticals.  It also indirectly fits in to future materials research due to the relevance to neutron sources and their use to investigate a wide range of materials from bio membranes to catalysts. It is also complementary to the UKNDN and AFCP nuclear data work.
Please confirm that your contact at the facility has seen and approved the application form you are about to submit: Yes, my contact at the facility has seen and approved this application form.
Please confirm that both you and the team members on behalf of whom you are submitting this application have viewed the privacy notice.: Yes, all team members listed on this application have viewed the privacy notice.



